.TH RTRACE 1G "November, 1994" 1
.SH NAME
rtrace - ray tracing program
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rtrace [options] scene image [>log]
.SH AUTHOR
Antonio Costa, INESC-Norte, 1989 1994
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I rtrace
command performs ray tracing from a
.I SFF
text file which must describe a scene with objects, lights, surface
definitions, textures, etc.
This scene file must be in the appropriate format, as
described bellow.
.br
Basically, ray tracing is an algorithm for the creation of realistic
images from the geometry and attributes of objects, lights, etc.
This ray tracer supports several types of objects (sphere, box, bicubic
patch, cone, cylinder, polygon, triangle and text), CSG and list operations,
different light types, reasonable surface definitions, lots of textures,
several anti-aliasing schemes, depth of field, stereoscopic image creation
and so on...
.SH OPTIONS
[w\fIimage-width\fR] [h\fIimage-height\fR]
.br
The parameters
.I image-width
and
.I image-height
define the image size. Defaults are 256x256.
.PP
[A\fIaliasing-threshold\fR]
.br
[S\fIshading-threshold\fR]
.br
[T\fIambient-threshold\fR]
.br
The parameters
.I aliasing-threshold
(pixel supersampling),
.I shading-threshold
(shading rays propagation) and
.I ambient-threshold
(ambient rays distribution caching)
control the image quality (0-best, 1-poor). Defaults are 0.05, 
0.01 and 0 (no ambient threshold). Good ranges are
0.1-0.03, 0.01-0.001 and 0.01-0.00001, respectively.
If the
.I aliasing-threshold
parameter is negative, contrast between pixel colors will be used
instead of difference.
.PP
[a\fIantialiasing-mode\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I antialiasing-mode
chooses adaptive supersampling antialiasing (0-default), semi-adaptive
supersampling antialiasing (1) or normal supersampling antialiasing (2-should
be used with nonzero focal apertures).
.PP
[B\fImaskfile\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I maskfile
creates a file with a background mask, suitable for mixing images (it is
like an alpha channel).
.PP
[b\fIbackface-mode\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I backface-mode
controls the removal of backface polygons and triangles from the scene.
Default is no removal (0). Partial removal (1) is made when finding
candidates for ray-object intersection; if there are any
objects facing against the ray, they will be skipped. Full removal (2) is
made during the read of the scene; if there are any objects facing
against the viewer, they are thrown away completely (this may cause
incorrect lighting and shadowing).
.PP
[c\fIcluster-size\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I cluster-size
controls the enclosing of objects
(number of grouped objects per cluster) in the object hierarchy. Use a low
value for sparse scenes, a high value for dense scenes (4-default).
Negative values means to use a method similar to the one of Goldsmith/Salmon
for clustering objects (0 uses the default value for this method).
Most of the times it performs better than the default method.
.PP
[d\fIambient-levels\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I ambient-levels
defines the number of shading levels (shading tree depth) in which
ambient lighting calculations will be done through ray
distribution (0-default, ie, no ray distribution). Use low values!
.PP
[D\fIambient-samples\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I ambient-samples
defines the maximum number of distributed rays to be used in ambient
lighting calculations (16-default). Again, use with care.
.PP
[i\fIintersect-mode\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I intersect-mode
chooses, in adaptive supersampling antialiasing, between testing
all scene objects (1) or only the objects found at the pixel
corners and inside (0-default; this greatly reduces CPU time, but with
very small objects, it sometimes fails).
.PP
[I\fIintersect-adjust-mode\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I intersect-adjust-mode
avoids some problems with invalid self-intersections (1) (0-default).
Scenes with text objects should be traced with this parameter equal to 1.
.PP
[j\fIjittering-mode\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I jittering-mode
chooses jittered sampling (1) or not (0-default). Sometimes, activating it
produces better images from scenes with small tricky details.
.PP
[l\fIlighting-mode\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I light-mode
controls the generation of shadow rays through non-opaque objects:
0-none (default), 1-partial, 2-full. If a scene has translucent objects, to
obtain realism one should use 1 or 2 (better).
.PP
[m\fIshading-mode\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I shading-mode
chooses between shading models: 0-normal phong, 1-strauss (default but slower)
(note: this model was developed by Paul Strauss of SGI).
.PP
[n\fInormal-mode\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I normal-mode
controls the correction of surface normals,
so that it points against the incident ray:
0-always (default), 1-only inside objects. With "correct" objects, it is good
to use 1.
.PP
[x\fIwalk-mode\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I walk-mode
controls how pixels are scanned inside the picture. Default is 0, which is
a serpertine walk (left to right, right to left, and so on). 1 means an
Hilbert (fractal) walk, which demands more memory, but maximizes the effect
of pixel coherency (in scenes with many objects, it can save some time!).
Perhaps 1 should be the default...
.PP
[z\fInormal-check-mode\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I normal-check-mode
controls the correction of surface normals
when textures that modify the normal are used,
as they may sometimes create strange surface effects. This tends to happen if
the scale of the normal perturbation is big.
0-no correction (default), 1-correction.
.PP
[R\fIrawfile\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I rawfile
creates a raw image file, without any antialiasing (all defects show up!).
.PP
[p\fIsampling-levels\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I sampling-levels
controls the amount of sampling levels inside pixels:
0-none (default) ... 3-maximum. A reasonable value is 2 for high resolutions,
but for small ones 3 gives better (and slower) results.
.PP
[s\fIshading-levels\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I shading-levels
establishes a maximum shading tree depth (default is 8). When a scene has
transparent/reflective objects, it may be important to lower this parameter,
or else the tracing never stops. In the other cases, there
should be no problem allowing it to be big.
.PP
[t\fItexture-mode\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I texture-mode
allows the definition of texture(s) for the objects: 0-no textures
(default), 1-with textures defined inside objects field,
2-with textures defined after objects field. As textures may consume much
CPU time, they should be activated only for final images.
.PP
[v\fIview-mode\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I view-mode
chooses the view mode: 0-normal (default), 1-left eye, 2-right eye.
.PP
[P\fIfocal-aperture\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I focal-aperture
defines the focal aperture of the camera (default 0.0, ie, pinhole
camera). If different than zero, there is depth of field, and so
adaptive supersampling antialiasing will not work well.
.PP
[F\fIfocal-distance\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I focal-distance
defines the focal distance of the camera (default is the distance
from the eye point to the look point).
.PP
[E\fIstereo-separation\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I stereo-separation
controls the separation between the left and the right eye.
If negative, it represents a percentage of the gaze distance.
.PP
[O\fIoutput-format\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I output-format
chooses between the PIC format (0-default) or the PPM format (1).
.PP
[V\fIverbose-mode\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I verbose-mode
supresses any messages (0) or shows listing of parameters (1), previous plus
statistics (2-default) or previous plus a line by line echo of the tracing
(3-default on DOS and transputers). Note: when running the DOS DJGPP version,
there are two extra values that display the picture on the screen, -1 for
grayscale or -2 for color. These values supress any messages.
.PP
[+O\fIobjects-max\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I objects-max
defines the maximum number of objects to use (default is 25000).
.PP
[+L\fIlights-max\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I lights-max
defines the maximum number of lights to use (default is 16).
.PP
[+S\fIsurfaces-max\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I surfaces-max
defines the maximum number of surfaces to use (default is 256).
.PP
[+C\fIcsg-level-max\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I csg-level-max
defines the maximum number of levels in CSG trees to use (default is 256).
.PP
[Me\fIeye-file\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I eye-file
is the name of a file that contains
.I eye
positions for movie fly-throughs
(3 real numbers representing XYZ in each line). In
.I movie
mode, the scene is read only once and successive images are produced and
stored in the picture file.
.PP
[Ml\fIlook-file\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I look-file
is the name of a file that contains
.I look
positions for movie fly-throughs.
.PP
[Mu\fIup-file\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I up-file
is the name of a file that contains
.I up
vectors for movie fly-throughs.
.PP
[Ma\fIangle-file\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I angle-file
is the name of a file that contains
.I angle
apertures for movie fly-throughs (2 real numbers in each line).
.PP
[M+\fImovie-frames-max\fR]
.br
The parameter
.I movie-frames-max
defines the maximum number of frames to produce (default is 50).
.PP
The
.I scene
data internal syntax (SFF) is described bellow.
.PP
The
.I image
file will contain the ray traced image.
The image file has a 4 byte header composed of
.I width
LS and MS bytes,
.I height
LS and MS bytes and
RGB byte triplets starting in the upper left corner line by line to
the lower right corner.
.SH RESTRICTIONS
The straightforward use:

  rtrace demo.sff demo.pic

is not recommended, as ray tracing usually takes lots of
CPU time to execute.
.PP
So, it is better to do:

  rtrace demo.sff demo.pic >demo.log &

or then use \fInice\fR (1) or similar strategies.
.SH BUGS
No bugs known.
They have to be hidden deep somewhere, as usual.
.SH DESCRIPTION
SFF (Simple File Format) description follows. This is a very crude
ASCII format, almost like if generated by a lexical analyser. The idea is to
have other programs create scene descriptions in more sophisticated
ways, and then feed the tokenized results to this program. So, it
behaves accordingly to the UNIX philosophy: one program for one task.
Complaints are not wellcome!...
.PP
There is a reasonable scene language available (SCN) that allows the creation
of scenes with much more flexibility; the converter is called 'scn2sff'
and works directly with this program.
.PP
Note: the ^(circunflex) character represents start of line.
.PP
[Start of File]
.br
^... Comment
.br
^Eye(X Y Z)
.br
^Look(X Y Z)
.br
^Up(X Y Z)
.br
^View_angle(H V) [1,89 degrees]
.br
^... Comment
.br
^Background(R G B)
.br
^Ambient(R G B)
.br
^... Comment
.br
^Light_type(Type) Position(X Y Z) Bright(R G B) ...
  |                                              |
  |                  /---------------------------/
  |                  |
  V                  V
 1-POINT:
 2-DIRECTIONAL: Direction(X Y Z) Angle(La) Light_Factor(Lf)
 3-EXTENDED:    Radius(R) Samples(N)
 4-PLANAR:      Vector1(X Y Z) Vector2(X Y Z) Samples1(N) Samples2(N)
.br
^Etc
.br
^<NL>
.br
^... Comment
.br
^Surface_type(Type) Color(R G B) ...
  |                               |
  |        /----------------------/
  |        |
  V        V
 1-: Dif(R G B) Spec(R G B) Phong(Pf) Metal(Mf) Trans(R G B) 
 2-: Smoothness(R G B) Metalness(R G B) Transmission(R G B) 
.br
^Etc
.br
^<NL>
.br
^... Comment
.br
^Object_type(Type) Surface_ID(S) Refraction(Re) ...
  |                                              |
  |                     /------------------------/
  |                     |
  V                     V
 1-SPHERE:          Center(X Y Z) Radius(R)
 2-PARALLELIPIPED:  Center(X Y Z) Size(X Y Z)
 3-PATCH:           Origin(X Y Z) Scale(X Y Z) Filename(...)
 4-CONE/CYLINDER:   Base(X Y Z) Base_Radius(Rb) Apex(X Y Z)
                    Apex_Radius(Ra)
 5-POLYGON:         Origin(X Y Z) Scale(X Y Z) Filename(...)
 6-TRIANGLE:        Origin(X Y Z) Scale(X Y Z) Filename(...)
 7-TEXT:            Filename(...)
.br
or
.br
 64-TEXTURE:        see below      
 65-TRANSFORMATION: Object_ID(I)
                    Transform(X1 Y1 Z1 W1 ... X4 Y4 Z4 W4)
 66-CSG 0:          Surface_ID(S) Refraction(Re) (Union-0 Sub-1 Int-2)
    CSG 1:          Next CSG member
    CSG 2:          End of CSG
 67-LIST 0:         Surface_ID(S) Refraction(Re)
    LIST 1:         End of List
.br
^Etc
.br
^<NL>
.br
^... Comment
.br
^Texture_type(Type) Object_ID(I)
  |                 Transform(X1 Y1 Z1 W1 ... X4 Y4 Z4 W4)
  |                 ...
  |                  |
  V                  V
 0-NULL:
 1-CHECKER:   Surface_ID(S)
 2-BLOTCH:    Scale(K) Surface_ID(S) [Filename(...) or -]
 3-BUMP:      Scale(K)
 4-MARBLE:    [Filename(...) or -]
 5-FBM:       Offset(K) Scale(K) Omega(K) Lambda(L)
              Threshold(K) Octaves(O)
              [Filename(...) or -]
 6-FBMBUMP:   Offset(K) Scale(K) Lambda(L) Octaves(O)
 7-WOOD:      Color(R G B)
 8-ROUND:     Scale(K)
 9-BOZO:      Turbulence(K) [Filename(...) or -]
 10-RIPPLES:  Frequency(K) Phase(K) Scale(K)
 11-WAVES:    Frequency(K) Phase(K) Scale(K)
 12-SPOTTED:  [Filename(...) or -]
 13-DENTS:    Scale(K)
 14-AGATE:    [Filename(...) or -]
 15-WRINKLES: Scale(K)
 16-GRANITE:  [Filename(...) or -]
 17-GRADIENT: Turbulence(K) Direction(X Y Z)
              [Filename(...) or -]
 18-IMAGEMAP: Turbulence(K) Mode(K) Axis(X Y) Filename(...)
 19-GLOSS:    Scale(K)
 20-BUMP3:    Scale(K) Size(K)
.br
^<NL>
.br
^... Comments
.br
[End of File]
.PP
1. Valid ranges of data
.PP
RGB must be in [0,1[
(Note: RGB brightness of lights may be between ]-300,300[;
negative values mean to not attenuate with distance).
.PP
XYZ must be in [-10000,10000]
.PP
Factor must be in [0,300[
.PP
Filename must a valid filename for the operating system, or then '-', in
which case data is read from the standard input or the current SFF stream.
.PP
2. Patch specification
.PP
File format for PATCH (bicubic 4-sided patch):
.PP
[Start]
.br
^Patch_1_Index(1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12)
.br
^Patch_2
.br
^Etc
.br
^<NL>
.br
^Patch_Index_1_Coords(X Y Z)
.br
^Patch_Index_2_Coords(X Y Z)
.br
^Etc
.br
^<NL>
.br
^...
.br
[End]
.PP
3. Polygon specification
.PP
File format for POLYGON (n-sided planar polygon):
.PP
[Start]
.br
^Polygon_1_Vertex_Number Polygon_1_Index(1 2 3 ...)
.br
^Polygon_2
.br
^Etc
.br
^<NL>
.br
^Polygon_Index_1_Coords(X Y Z)
.br
^Polygon_Index_2_Coords(X Y Z)
.br
^Etc
.br
^<NL>
.br
^...
.br
[End]
.PP
4. Triangle specification
.PP
File format for TRIANGLE (3-sided polygon with vertex normals):
.PP
[Start]
.br
^Triangle_1_Vertice_1(X Y Z) Normal_1(X Y Z)
            Vertice_2(X Y Z) Normal_2(X Y Z)
            Vertice_3(X Y Z) Normal_3(X Y Z)
.br
^Triangle_2
.br
^<NL>
.br
^...
.br
[End]
.PP
If the surface is has index 0, then you must specify 3 surface indices
after all the vertices and normals.
.PP
5. An example
.PP
[Start of File]
.br
View
.br
25 25 7         - Eye point
.br
0 0 0           - Look point
.br
0 1 0           - Up vector
.br
30 30           - View angles
.br
Colors
.br
0.196 0.6 0.8   - Background (Sky Blue)
.br
0.1 0.1 0.1     - Ambient light
.br
Lights
.br
1 0 60 60 0.9 0.9 0.9  - Point Light 1
.br
1 20 40 -7 0.9 0.9 0.9 - Point Light 2
.br
<NL>
.br
Surfaces
.br
1 0.6 0.8 0.196 0.99 0.99 0.99 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
.br
1 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 50 1 0 0 0
.br
1 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 200 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8
.br
1 0.9 0.2 0.2 0.99 0.99 0.99 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
.br
<NL>
.br
Objects
.br
5 1 1.0 0 0 0 15 15 15  - Polygon
.br
4 1 2 3 4
.br
<NL>
.br
1 0 1
.br
1 0 -1
.br
-1 0 -1
.br
-1 0 1
.br
<NL>
.br
2 2 1.0 0 2 0 7 2 3     - Parallelepiped
.br
2 3 1.5 0 5 10 3 5 3    - Parallelepiped
.br
1 4 1.0 7 15 -7 3       - Sphere
.br
<NL>
.br
Textures
.br
2 1 2 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 1 0.4 4
.br
4 2 5 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 1
.br
5 4 10 0 0 0 1 10 0 0 1 1 10 0 0 0 0 1 0 0.6 0.5 2 0.1 6
.br
<NL>
.br
Demo / 11-OCT-1989 / Antonio Costa
.br
[End of File]
.PP
To ray trace without textures, do:

  rtrace demo.sff demo.pic >&demo.log

else, do:

  rtrace t2 demo.sff demo.pic >&demo.log

Another example with INESC symbol:
.PP
[Start of File]
.br
View
.br
45.0 45.0 81.0  - Eye point
.br
45.0 45.0 -81.0 - Look point
.br
 0.0  1.0  0.0  - Up vector
.br
30 30           - View angles
.br
Colors
.br
0.196 0.6 0.8 - Background (Sky Blue)
.br
0.3 0.3 0.3   - Ambient
.br
Lights
.br
1  0.0 100.0 100.0 1 1 1 - Light 1 (White)
.br
1 90.0 100.0 100.0 1 1 0 - Light 2 (Yellow)
.br
<NL>
.br
Surfaces
.br
1 0.557 0.420 0.137 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.2 0.3 0.3 30 0.8 0 0 0
.br
1 0.137 0.420 0.557 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.4 5 0.2 0 0 0
.br
1 0.600 0.800 0.200 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 1 0 0 0 0
.br
<NL>
.br
Objects
.br
1 1 1.0 10.0 09.5 0.0 4.5 - Sphere
.br
1 1 1.0 10.0 26.5 0.0 4.5
.br
1 1 1.0 20.0 63.5 0.0 4.5
.br
1 1 1.0 20.0 80.0 0.0 4.5
.br
1 1 1.0 40.0 09.5 0.0 4.5
.br
1 1 1.0 40.0 26.5 0.0 4.5
.br
1 1 1.0 40.0 43.5 0.0 4.5
.br
1 1 1.0 50.0 80.0 0.0 4.5
.br
1 1 1.0 60.0 53.0 0.0 4.5
.br
1 1 1.0 70.0 09.5 0.0 4.5
.br
1 1 1.0 70.0 43.5 0.0 4.5
.br
4 2 1.0 10.0 30.0 0.0 1.5 10.0 70.0 0.0 1.5 - Cylinder
.br
1 2 1.0 10.0 70.0 0.0 1.5
.br
4 2 1.0 10.0 70.0 0.0 1.5 17.5 77.5 0.0 1.5
.br
4 2 1.0 12.5 12.0 0.0 1.5 20.0 19.5 0.0 1.5
.br
1 2 1.0 20.0 19.5 0.0 1.5
.br
4 2 1.0 20.0 19.5 0.0 1.5 20.0 60.0 0.0 1.5
.br
4 2 1.0 22.5 61.0 0.0 1.5 37.5 46.0 0.0 1.5
.br
4 2 1.0 37.5 12.0 0.0 1.5 30.0 19.5 0.0 1.5
.br
1 2 1.0 30.0 19.5 0.0 1.5
.br
4 2 1.0 30.0 19.5 0.0 1.5 30.0 33.5 0.0 1.5
.br
1 2 1.0 30.0 33.5 0.0 1.5
.br
4 2 1.0 30.0 33.5 0.0 1.5 37.5 41.0 0.0 1.5
.br
4 2 1.0 30.0 26.5 0.0 1.5 36.5 26.5 0.0 1.5
.br
4 2 1.0 40.0 47.0 0.0 1.5 40.0 70.0 0.0 1.5
.br
1 2 1.0 40.0 70.0 0.0 1.5
.br
4 2 1.0 40.0 70.0 0.0 1.5 47.5 77.5 0.0 1.5
.br
4 2 1.0 42.5 12.0 0.0 1.5 50.0 19.5 0.0 1.5
.br
1 2 1.0 50.0 19.5 0.0 1.5
.br
4 2 1.0 50.0 19.5 0.0 1.5 50.0 43.0 0.0 1.5
.br
1 2 1.0 50.0 43.0 0.0 1.5
.br
4 2 1.0 50.0 43.0 0.0 1.5 57.5 50.5 0.0 1.5
.br
4 2 1.0 67.5 12.0 0.0 1.5 60.0 19.5 0.0 1.5
.br
1 2 1.0 60.0 19.5 0.0 1.5
.br
4 2 1.0 60.0 19.5 0.0 1.5 60.0 33.5 0.0 1.5
.br
1 2 1.0 60.0 33.5 0.0 1.5
.br
4 2 1.0 60.0 33.5 0.0 1.5 67.5 41.0 0.0 1.5
.br
5 3 1.0 0.0 4.0 0.0 200.0 200.0 200.0 - Polygon
.br
4 1 2 3 4
.br
<NL>
.br
 1.0 0.0  1.0
.br
 1.0 0.0 -1.0
.br
-1.0 0.0 -1.0
.br
-1.0 0.0  1.0
.br
<NL>
.br
<NL>
.br
End
.br
INESC Logo / 23-FEB-1989 / Antonio Costa
.SH HISTORY
Copyright (C) 1988, 1994 Antonio Costa.
.br
Permission is granted to use this file in whole or
in part for any purpose, educational,
recreational or commercial, provided that this copyright notice
is retained unchanged. This software is available to all free of
charge by anonymous FTP.
.TP
08-Nov-94  Antonio Costa
.br
Release 8.4.2
.br
acc@asterix.inescn.pt
